OF all human sciences the most useful and most imperfect appears to me to be that of mankind: and I will venture
to say, the single inscription on the Temple of Delphi contained a precept more difficult and more important than
is to be found in all the huge volumes that moralists have ever written. I consider the subject of the following
discourse as one of the most interesting questions philosophy can propose, and unhappily for us, one of the most
thorny that philosophers can have to solve. For how shall we know the source of inequality between men, if we do
not begin by knowing mankind? And how shall man hope to see himself as nature made him, across all the
changes which the succession of place and time must have produced in his original constitution? How can he
distinguish what is fundamental in his nature from the changes and additions which his circumstances and the
advances he has made have introduced to modify his primitive condition? Like the statue of Glaucus, which was
so disfigured by time, seas and tempests, that it looked more like a wild beast than a god, the human soul, altered
in society by a thousand causes perpetually recurring, by the acquisition of a multitude of truths and errors, by the
changes happening to the constitution of the body, and by the continual jarring of the passions, has, so to speak,
changed in appearance, so as to be hardly recognisable. Instead of a being, acting constantly from fixed and
invariable principles, instead of that celestial and majestic simplicity, impressed on it by its divine Author, we
find in it only the frightful contrast of passion mistaking itself for reason, and of understanding grown delirious.
It is still more cruel that, as every advance made by the human species removes it still farther from its primitive
state, the more discoveries we make, the more we deprive ourselves of the means of making the most important of
all. Thus it is, in one sense, by our very study of man, that the knowledge of him is put out of our power.
It is easy to perceive that it is in these successive changes in the constitution of man that we must look for the
origin of those differences which now distinguish men, who, it is allowed, are as equal among themselves as were
the animals of every kind, before physical causes had introduced those varieties which are now observable among
some of them.

It is, in fact, not to be conceived that these primary changes, however they may have arisen, could have altered, all
at once and in the same manner, every individual of the species. It is natural to think that, while the condition of
some of them grew better or worse, and they were acquiring various good or bad qualities not inherent in their
nature, there were others who continued a longer time in their original condition. Such was doubtless the first
source of the inequality of mankind, which it is much easier to point out thus in general terms, than to assign with
precision to its actual causes.

Let not my readers therefore imagine that I flatter myself with having seen what it appears to me so difficult to
discover. I have here entered upon certain arguments, and risked some conjectures, less in the hope of solving the
difficulty, than with a view to throwing some light upon it, and reducing the question to its proper form. Others
may easily proceed farther on the same road, and yet no one find it very easy to get to the end. For it is by no
means a light undertaking to distinguish properly between what is original and what is artificial in the actual
nature of man, or to form a true idea of a state which no longer exists, perhaps never did exist, and probably never
will exist; and of which, it is, nevertheless, necessary to have true ideas, in order to form a proper judgment of our
present state. It requires, indeed, more philosophy than can be imagined to enable any one to determine exactly
what precautions he ought to take, in order to make solid observations on this subject; and it appears to me that a
good solution of the following problem would be not unworthy of the Aristotles and Plinys of the present age.
What experiments would have to be made, to discover the natural man? And how are those experiments to be
made in a state of society?

So far am I from undertaking to solve this problem, that I think I have sufficiently considered the subject, to
venture to declare beforehand that our greatest philosophers would not be too good to direct such experiments,
and our most powerful sovereigns to make them. Such a combination we have very little reason to expect,
especially attended with the perseverance, or rather succession of intelligence and goodwill necessary on both
sides to success.

These investigations, which are so difficult to make, and have been hitherto so little thought of, are, nevertheless,
the only means that remain of obviating a multitude of difficulties which deprive us of the knowledge of the real
foundations of human society. It is this ignorance of the nature of man, which casts so much uncertainty and
obscurity on the true definition of natural right: for, the idea of right, says Burlamaqui, and more particularly that
of natural right, are ideas manifestly relative to the nature of man. It is then from this very nature itself, he goes
on, from the constitution and state of man, that we must deduce the first principles of this science.

We cannot see without surprise and disgust how little agreement there is between the different authors who have
treated this great subject. Among the more important writers there are scarcely two of the same mind about it. Not
to speak of the ancient philosophers, who seem to have done their best purposely to contradict one another on the
most fundamental principles, the Roman jurists subjected man and the other animals indiscriminately to the same
natural law, because they considered, under that name, rather the law which nature imposes on herself than that
which she prescribes to others; or rather because of the particular acceptation of the term law among those jurists;
who seem on this occasion to have understood nothing more by it than the general relations established by nature
between all animated beings, for their common preservation. The moderns, understanding, by the term law,
merely a rule prescribed to a moral being, that is to say intelligent, free and considered in his relations to other
beings, consequently confine the jurisdiction of natural law to man, as the only animal endowed with reason. But,
defining this law, each after his own fashion, they have established it on such metaphysical principles, that there
are very few persons among us capable of comprehending them, much less of discovering them for themselves.

So that the definitions of these learned men, all differing in everything else, agree only in this, that it is impossible
to comprehend the law of nature, and consequently to obey it, without being a very subtle casuist and a profound
metaphysician. All which is as much as to say that mankind must have employed, in the establishment of society,
a capacity which is acquired only with great difficulty, and by very few persons, even in a state of society.

Knowing so little of nature, and agreeing so ill about the meaning of the word law, it would be difficult for us to
fix on a good definition of natural law. Thus all the definitions we meet with in books, setting aside their defect in
point of uniformity, have yet another fault, in that they are derived from many kinds of knowledge, which men do
not possess naturally, and from advantages of which they can have no idea until they have already departed from
that state. Modern writers begin by inquiring what rules it would be expedient for men to agree on for their
common interest, and then give the name of natural law to a collection of these rules, without any other proof than
the good that would result from their being universally practised. This is undoubtedly a simple way of making
definitions, and of explaining the nature of things by almost arbitrary conveniences.

But as long as we are ignorant of the natural man, it is in vain for us to attempt to determine either the law
originally prescribed to him, or that which is best adapted to his constitution. All we can know with any certainty
respecting this law is that, if it is to be a law, not only the wills of those it obliges must be sensible of their
submission to it; but also, to be natural, it must come directly from the voice of nature.

Throwing aside, therefore, all those scientific books, which teach us only to see men such as they have made
themselves, and contemplating the first and most simple operations of the human soul, I think I can perceive in it
two principles prior to reason, one of them deeply interesting us in our own welfare and preservation, and the
other exciting a natural repugnance at seeing any other sensible being, and particularly any of our own species,
suffer pain or death. It is from the agreement and combination which the understanding is in a position to
establish between these two principles, without its being necessary to introduce that of sociability, that all the
rules of natural right appear to me to be derived −− rules which our reason is afterwards obliged to establish on
other foundations, when by its successive developments it has been led to suppress nature itself.

In proceeding thus, we shall not be obliged to make man a philosopher before he is a man. His duties toward
others are not dictated to him only by the later lessons of wisdom; and, so long as he does not resist the internal
impulse of compassion, he will never hurt any other man, nor even any sentient being, except on those lawful
occasions on which his own preservation is concerned and he is obliged to give himself the preference. By this
method also we put an end to the time−honoured disputes concerning the participation of animals in natural law:
for it is clear that, being destitute of intelligence and liberty, they cannot recognise that law; as they partake,
however, in some measure of our nature, in consequence of the sensibility with which they are endowed, they
ought to partake of natural right; so that mankind is subjected to a kind of obligation even toward the brutes. It
appears, in fact, that if I am bound to do no injury to my fellow−creatures, this is less because they are rational
than because they are sentient beings: and this quality, being common both to men and beasts, ought to entitle the
latter at least to the privilege of not being wantonly ill−treated by the former.

The very study of the original man, of his real wants, and the fundamental principles of his duty, is besides the
only proper method we can adopt to obviate all the difficulties which the origin of moral inequality presents, on
the true foundations of the body politic, on the reciprocal rights of its members, and on many other similar topics
equally important and obscure.

If we look at human society with a calm and disinterested eye, it seems, at first, to show us only the violence of
the powerful and the oppression of the weak. The mind is shocked at the cruelty of the one, or is induced to
lament the blindness of the other; and as nothing is less permanent in life than those external relations, which are
more frequently produced by accident than wisdom, and which are called weakness or power, riches or poverty,
all human institutions seem at first glance to be founded merely on banks of shifting sand. It is only by taking a
closer look, and removing the dust and sand that surround the edifice, that we perceive the immovable basis on
which it is raised, and learn to respect its foundations. Now, without a serious study of man, his natural faculties
and their successive development, we shall never be able to make these necessary distinctions, or to separate, in
the actual constitution of things, that which is the effect of the divine will, from the innovations attempted by
human art. The political and moral investigations, therefore, to which the important question before us leads, are
in every respect useful; while the hypothetical history of governments affords a lesson equally instructive to
mankind.

In considering what we should have become, had we been left to ourselves, we should learn to bless Him, whose
gracious hand, correcting our institutions, and giving them an immovable basis, has prevented those disorders
which would otherwise have arisen from them, and caused our happiness to come from those very sources which
seemed likely to involve us in misery.

IT is of man that I have to speak; and the question I am investigating shows me that it is to men that I must
address myself: for questions of this sort are not asked by those who are afraid to honour truth. I shall then
confidently uphold the cause of humanity before the wise men who invite me to do so, and shall not be
dissatisfied if I acquit myself in a manner worthy of my subject and of my judges.
