OF all human sciences the most useful and most imperfect appears to me to be that of mankind: and I will venture
to say, the single inscription on the Temple of Delphi contained a precept more difficult and more important than
is to be found in all the huge volumes that moralists have ever written. I consider the subject of the following
discourse as one of the most interesting questions philosophy can propose, and unhappily for us, one of the most
thorny that philosophers can have to solve. For how shall we know the source of inequality between men, if we do
not begin by knowing mankind? And how shall man hope to see himself as nature made him, across all the
changes which the succession of place and time must have produced in his original constitution? How can he
distinguish what is fundamental in his nature from the changes and additions which his circumstances and the
advances he has made have introduced to modify his primitive condition? Like the statue of Glaucus, which was
so disfigured by time, seas and tempests, that it looked more like a wild beast than a god, the human soul, altered
in society by a thousand causes perpetually recurring, by the acquisition of a multitude of truths and errors, by the
changes happening to the constitution of the body, and by the continual jarring of the passions, has, so to speak,
changed in appearance, so as to be hardly recognisable. Instead of a being, acting constantly from fixed and
invariable principles, instead of that celestial and majestic simplicity, impressed on it by its divine Author, we
find in it only the frightful contrast of passion mistaking itself for reason, and of understanding grown delirious.
It is still more cruel that, as every advance made by the human species removes it still farther from its primitive
state, the more discoveries we make, the more we deprive ourselves of the means of making the most important of
all. Thus it is, in one sense, by our very study of man, that the knowledge of him is put out of our power.
It is easy to perceive that it is in these successive changes in the constitution of man that we must look for the
origin of those differences which now distinguish men, who, it is allowed, are as equal among themselves as were
the animals of every kind, before physical causes had introduced those varieties which are now observable among
some of them.

It is, in fact, not to be conceived that these primary changes could have altered.
