OF all human sciences the most useful and most imperfect appears to me to be that of mankind: and I will venture
to say, the single inscription on the Temple of Delphi contained a precept more difficult and more important than
is to be found in all the huge volumes that moralists have ever written. I consider the subject of the following
discourse as one of the most interesting questions philosophy can propose, and unhappily for us, one of the most
thorny that philosophers can have to solve. For how shall we know the source of inequality between men, if we do
not begin by knowing mankind? And how shall man hope to see himself as nature made him, across all the
changes which the succession of place and time must have produced in his original constitution? How can he
distinguish what is fundamental in his nature from the changes and additions which his circumstances and the
advances he has made have introduced to modify his primitive condition? Like the statue of Glaucus, which was
so disfigured by time, seas and tempests, that it looked more like a wild beast than a god, the human soul, altered
in society by a thousand causes perpetually recurring, by the acquisition of a multitude of truths and errors, by the
changes happening to the constitution of the body, and by the continual jarring of the passions, has, so to speak,
changed in appearance, so as to be hardly recognisable. Instead of a being, acting constantly from fixed and
invariable principles, instead of that celestial and majestic simplicity, impressed on it by its divine Author, we
find in it only the frightful contrast of passion mistaking itself for reason, and of understanding grown delirious.
It is still more cruel that, as every advance made by the human species removes it still farther from its primitive
state, the more discoveries we make, the more we deprive ourselves of the means of making the most important of
all. Thus it is, in one sense, by our very study of man, that the knowledge of him is put out of our power.
It is easy to perceive that it is in these successive changes in the constitution of man that we must look for the
origin of those differences which now distinguish men, who, it is allowed, are as equal among themselves as were
the animals of every kind, before physical causes had introduced those varieties which are now observable among
some of them.

It is, in fact, not to be conceived that these primary changes, however they may have arisen, could have altered, all
at once and in the same manner, every individual of the species. It is natural to think that, while the condition of
some of them grew better or worse, and they were acquiring various good or bad qualities not inherent in their
nature, there were others who continued a longer time in their original condition. Such was doubtless the first
source of the inequality of mankind, which it is much easier to point out thus in general terms, than to assign with
precision to its actual causes.

Let not my readers therefore imagine that I flatter myself with having seen what it appears to me so difficult to
discover. I have here entered upon certain arguments, and risked some conjectures, less in the hope of solving the
difficulty, than with a view to throwing some light upon it, and reducing the question to its proper form. Others
may easily proceed farther on the same road, and yet no one find it very easy to get to the end. For it is by no
means a light undertaking to distinguish properly between what is original and what is artificial in the actual
nature of man, or to form a true idea of a state which no longer exists, perhaps never did exist, and probably never
will exist; and of which, it is, nevertheless, necessary to have true ideas, in order to form a proper judgment of our
present state. It requires, indeed, more philosophy than can be imagined to enable any one to determine exactly
what precautions he ought to take, in order to make solid observations on this subject; and it appears to me that a
good solution of the following problem would be not unworthy of the Aristotles and Plinys of the present age.
What experiments would have to be made, to discover the natural man? And how are those experiments to be
made in a state of society?

So far am I from undertaking to solve this problem, that I think I have sufficiently considered the subject, to
venture to declare beforehand that our greatest philosophers would not be too good to direct such experiments,
and our most powerful sovereigns to make them. Such a combination we have very little reason to expect,
especially attended with the perseverance, or rather succession of intelligence and goodwill necessary on both
sides to success.

These investigations, which are so difficult to make, and have been hitherto so little thought of, are, nevertheless,
the only means that remain of obviating a multitude of difficulties which deprive us of the knowledge of the real
foundations of human society. It is this ignorance of the nature of man, which casts so much uncertainty and
obscurity on the true definition of natural right: for, the idea of right, says Burlamaqui, and more particularly that
of natural right, are ideas manifestly relative to the nature of man. It is then from this very nature itself, he goes
on, from the constitution and state of man, that we must deduce the first principles of this science.

We cannot see without surprise and disgust how little agreement there is between the different authors who have
treated this great subject. Among the more important writers there are scarcely two of the same mind about it. Not
to speak of the ancient philosophers, who seem to have done their best purposely to contradict one another on the
most fundamental principles, the Roman jurists subjected man and the other animals indiscriminately to the same
natural law, because they considered, under that name, rather the law which nature imposes on herself than that
which she prescribes to others; or rather because of the particular acceptation of the term law among those jurists;
who seem on this occasion to have understood nothing more by it than the general relations established by nature
between all animated beings, for their common preservation. The moderns, understanding, by the term law,
merely a rule prescribed to a moral being, that is to say intelligent, free and considered in his relations to other
beings, consequently confine the jurisdiction of natural law to man, as the only animal endowed with reason. But,
defining this law, each after his own fashion, they have established it on such metaphysical principles, that there
are very few persons among us capable of comprehending them, much less of discovering them for themselves.

So that the definitions of these learned men, all differing in everything else, agree only in this, that it is impossible
to comprehend the law of nature, and consequently to obey it, without being a very subtle casuist and a profound
metaphysician. All which is as much as to say that mankind must have employed, in the establishment of society,
a capacity which is acquired only with great difficulty, and by very few persons, even in a state of society.

Knowing so little of nature, and agreeing so ill about the meaning of the word law, it would be difficult for us to
fix on a good definition of natural law. Thus all the definitions we meet with in books, setting aside their defect in
point of uniformity, have yet another fault, in that they are derived from many kinds of knowledge, which men do
not possess naturally, and from advantages of which they can have no idea until they have already departed from
that state. Modern writers begin by inquiring what rules it would be expedient for men to agree on for their
common interest, and then give the name of natural law to a collection of these rules, without any other proof than
the good that would result from their being universally practised. This is undoubtedly a simple way of making
definitions, and of explaining the nature of things by almost arbitrary conveniences.
