"Not for honor and glory, certainly.  War is a dirty business and
I do not like dirt.  I am not a soldier and I have no desire to
seek the bubble reputation even in the cannon's mouth.  Yet, here
I am at the wars--whom God never intended to be other than a
studious country gentleman.  For, Melanie, bugles do not stir my
blood nor drums entice my feet and I see too clearly that we have
been betrayed, betrayed by our arrogant Southern selves, believing
that one of us could whip a dozen Yankees, believing that King
Cotton could rule the world.  Betrayed, too, by words and catch
phrases, prejudices and hatreds coming from the mouths of those
highly placed, those men whom we respected and revered--'King
Cotton, Slavery, States' Rights, Damn Yankees.'

"And so when I lie on my blanket and look up at the stars and say
'What are you fighting for?' I think of States' Rights and cotton
and the darkies and the Yankees whom we have been bred to hate,
and I know that none of these is the reason why I am fighting.
Instead, I see Twelve Oaks and remember how the moonlight slants
across the white columns, and the unearthly way the magnolias
look, opening under the moon, and how the climbing roses make the
side porch shady even at the hottest noon.  And I see Mother,
sewing there, as she did when I was a little boy.  And I hear the
darkies coming home across the fields at dusk, tired and singing
and ready for supper, and the sound of the windlass as the bucket
goes down into the cool well.  And there's the long view down the
road to the river, across the cotton fields, and the mist rising
from the bottom lands in the twilight.  And that is why I'm here
who have no love of death or misery or glory and no hatred for
anyone.  Perhaps that is what is called patriotism, love of home
and country.  But Melanie, it goes deeper than that.  For,
Melanie, these things I have named are but the symbols of the
thing for which I risk my life, symbols of the kind of life I
love.  For I am fighting for the old days, the old ways I love so
much but which, I fear, are now gone forever, no matter how the
die may fall.  For, win or lose, we lose just the same.

"If we win this war and have the Cotton Kingdom of our dreams, we
still have lost, for we will become a different people and the old
quiet ways will go.  The world will be at our doors clamoring for
cotton and we can command our own price.  Then, I fear, we will
become like the Yankees, at whose money-making activities,
acquisitiveness and commercialism we now sneer.  And if we lose,
Melanie, if we lose!

"I am not afraid of danger or capture or wounds or even death, if
death must come, but I do fear that once this war is over, we will
never get back to the old times.  And I belong in those old times.
I do not belong in this mad present of killing and I fear I will
not fit into any future, try though I may.  Nor will you, my dear,
for you and I are of the same blood.  I do not know what the
future will bring, but it cannot be as beautiful or as satisfying
as the past.

"I lie and look at the boys sleeping near me and I wonder if the
twins or Alex or Cade think these same thoughts.  I wonder if they
know they are fighting for a Cause that was lost the minute the
first shot was fired, for our Cause is really our own way of
living and that is gone already.  But I do not think they think
these things and they are lucky.

"I had not thought of this for us when I asked you to marry me.  I
had thought of life going on at Twelve Oaks as it had always done,
peacefully, easily, unchanging.
