A patient has comorbidities when they have two chronic diseases at the same time. Azar stressed that he was not trying to fault people because they had such conditions and was merely pointing out that that put them at higher risk of complications from Covid-19. Azar's comments about the US health care system were ironic considering that the administration has repeatedly tried to dismantle the Affordable Care Act that includes protections for people with pre-existing conditions, including in a current Supreme Court case, and has come up with no alternative health care system to put in its place. Navarro meanwhile singled out the CDC, led by Trump appointee Dr. Robert Redfield, for the early failures on coronavirus testing, reflecting deepening tensions between the agency and the White House. "Early on in this crisis, the CDC, which really had the most trusted brand around the world in this space -- really let the country down with the testing," Navarro, a trade adviser drafted into the coronavirus effort, said on NBC's "Meet the Press." "Not only did they keep the testing within the bureaucracy, they had a bad test and that set us back," Navarro said. The criticism comes as the White House, which had already marginalized the CDC in the public messaging during the worst public health crisis in 100 years, faces fresh criticism of its failure to put in place a robust testing and tracing scheme nationwide that could make the task of reopening safer. CNN has reported that tensions are rising between the White House and the nation's leading public health agency. A senior CDC official, speaking on condition of anonymity, hit back at the White House, saying it had often not been clear about what it wanted from the agency, expressing the sense of anger and frustration at its Atlanta headquarters. "This administration has shown time and time again that it has a problem with science. We are giving them science and they don't seem to want it," the official told CNN's Nick Valencia. The big gamble of reopening The new politicization of the pandemic came as the country transitions from trying to halt the virus in its tracks to living with it until a vaccine or therapies are found.